=======================================================
Word endings (noun cases) and word changes (declension)
=======================================================

Most of you have probably heard that "Finnish doesn't have
prepositions".  Actually, that's not entirely true, but it is true in
spirit.  As we discussed, Finnish is a syntethic language, and instead
of using prepositions (modifier words), it directly attaches suffixes
to the words they modify.  So instead of saying ``in the house``, one
would say ``talo-ssa`` with equivalent meaning.  When they are added
to the words, there are two main parts:

* First, you have to know what suffixes to use.  This is hard, because there isn't a
  one-to-one mapping of usage to other languages.  However, prepositions
  are *always* hard in other languages because there never are
  one-to-one maps, so this is normal.

* Second, suffixes aren't directly, attached, there can be changes in the base
  word.  This may seem difficult at first, and it does take some
  getting used to.  However, as in most things in Finnish, it ends up
  being quite logical.

Mentally, there are two main thing you need to be able to do quickly:

* First, you have to be able to apply endings to words.  This is both
  knowing what to use, and how to do the word changes.

* Second, and maybe not as obvious, is being able to look at a word
  and discover the base and extension(s).  This is hardly
  ever mentioned, but actually does require some practice.  To read Finnish
  easily, this needs to be automatic.  When reading a new word, you
  should read from beginning to end and end to beginning at the same
  time.

Glossary: The *base form* is the nominative: what you look up in a
dictionary.  The *stem* is a modification (*inflection*) of the base
form to which extensions can be attached.  Our main concern now is
*locative cases* of nouns.


The noun case endings
=====================

There are different types of endings that can be applied to nouns: the
basic noun cases, particles that have some sort of emphasis, and many
other types.  We are mainly focused on the noun cases right now.

Below, you can see the table of the basic endings.  There are more,
and we aren't going to try to explain them right now --- you'll learn
them them in real courses.  For now, we are just looking at the
overall patterns.

.. csv-table::
   :delim: |
   :header-rows: 1

   | Name|  ending| meaning|how used
   **Basic**
   | Nominative| \-                       | basic form             | (this is the base form)
   | Genitive|  ``-n``                    | possessive or object   | closed (weak)
   | Partitive| ``-a``, ``-ta``, ``-tta`` | part                   | (attached to base form)
   **Locative**
   | Illative| ``-Vn``                    | to inside              | open (strong)
   | Inessive| ``-ssa``                   | inside                 | closed (weak)
   | Elative | ``-sta``                   | from inside            | closed (weak)
   | Allative| ``-lle``                   | to                     | closed (weak)
   | Adessive| ``-lla``                   | on, by                 | closed (weak)
   | Ablative| ``-lta``                   | from                   | closed (weak)
   **Other**
   | ...
   **Plural**
   | Nominative plural| ``-t``            | basic form plural      | closed (weak)
   | Plural| ``-i-`` + other ending       | plural                 | depends on other ending

We see three main categories: The nominative is the base form of a
word.  and the partitive uses the base form (which is usually strong).
The Illative uses the strong form of the word.  Most most others use
the weak form.  The main point of this chapter is learning how to
apply these endings to words, and the strong/weak question is the most
important thing for that.

There are more endings which we aren't discussing now, but just
realize they exist and fit in the same pattern as above:

* Possessive suffixes: ``-ni`` (my), ``-si`` (yours), ``-mme`` (our),
  ``-nne`` (yours, plural), ``-nsa`` (his, hers, their, singular or
  plural).  These take the ... form.  TODO

* Enclitic Particles: ``-ko``, ``-han``, ``-pa``.  These convey some
  mood or emphasis in speaking.  TODO

* ... and more.  TODO

**Remember vowel harmony!** In a word without (``a``, ``o``, or
``u``), we get the changes (``a→ä``, ``o→ö``, and ``u→y``) in *all*
suffixes.  It is so predictable it's not even worth writing both
forms, so I don't.



Reminder: syllable formation
============================

Let's review something from a few chapters ago: syllable formation.

Summary: Syllables start at every consonant before a vowel, and
between vowels that don't form a dipthong.  So a word might be
segmented this way: ``kvk·kv·kv``.

A syllable ``kv`` is open, and a syllable ``kvk`` is closed.  If a
single ``k`` is added to an open syllable, it becomes closed: ``kv`` +
``-k`` → ``kvk``.  Same with ``kv`` + ``-kkv`` → ``kvk·kv``.

A long vowel (the same vowel letter twice in a row) also effectively
makes a syllable open regardless of what is at the end.  So ``-kaan``
is open, but ``-kan`` and ``-kain`` (dipthong) are not.  TODO:
dipthongs too?



Consonant gradation
===================

Finnish has a concept called *consonant gradation*.  It is almost
exactly what it says: the consonant changes between two grades, strong
and weak.  Strong consists of something harder (e.g. ``p``), and the
weak consists of something softer (e.g. ``p`` → ``v``) of somewhat
similar sounds.

As with everything in languages, there's no single reason for this.
But you can consider it as somehow making the language flow better:
when a syllable is open at the end of the word, it can take more
emphasis at the beginning.  But when it becomes closed, it takes
something softer to make it flow better.

The following are the basic consonant gradation patterns in Finnish
(there are a few more, but they are infrequent enough so you'll learn
them as you need them.)

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   Strong (open), weak (closed)
   ``k``, ``_`` (is removed)
   ``p``, ``v``
   ``t``, ``d``
   ``kk``, ``k``
   ``pp``, ``p``
   ``tt``, ``t``
   ``nk``, ``ng``
   ``mp``, ``mm``
   ``nt``, ``nn``
   ``lt``, ``ll``
   ``rt``, ``rr``

So, for example, we have ``ka·tu`` + ``-t`` → ``ka·dut``, and
``tuk·ki`` + ``-n`` → ``tu·kin``.

The patterns ``st``, ``sp``, ``sk``, and ``tk`` never change.

Many students consider consonant gradation as annoying.
However, they are simple if thought of in terms of open and closed
syllables.  **In fact, it is best to not think of these as being word
changes: imagine that words exist as a quantum superposition of both
forms occurring at the same time.** You see one particular form
written down depending on if it is observed in an open syllable or
closed syllable, and you mentally write down whatever is needed in
each case.

Primarily, consonant gradation happens in the last syllable of the
word, depending on what ending is applied: if it's a closing ending
(``-t``, ``-n``, ``-ssa``, etc) you get the weak form, and otherwise
the strong form.

Secondarily, it can happen before the last syllable, but only when there
are changes that have effects that open or close a syllable.   So, you
make a change at the end which happens to open or close the second to
last syllable (you'll see these in the next section).

A syllable that has a long vowel (two of the same in a row) in it is
always open: imagine that the long sound insulates the front from the
back of the syllable.  This leads to words where consonant gradation
*should* apply, but is always in the strong form.

You have to be able to do both forward consonant gradation (a syllable
closes) and reverse consonant gradation (a syllable opens).

Stems from basic forms
======================

If you have a word like ``pu·he·lin`` (phone), you can't just add an
ending like ``-n`` to it because it would break the syllable pattern
(two consonants at the end of a syllable).  So, before you can add
endings, every word is converted to some form that ends in a vowel.

The **base form** is the nominative, and the **inflectional stem** is
the form which most endings are added to.  The inflectional stem can
be observed in both strong and weak forms.  The inflectional stem is
the same as the base form when it's already suitable for adding stems
(such as when it ends in a vowel).

A word like ``talo`` (building) is directly able to take any ending:
the base form is the same as the stem.

Examples of stem changes
------------------------

.. note::

   Below are various examples below for your information not
   memorization.  For now just look at the general patterns.  You will
   learn these as you go through your regular lessons, and as you do
   it will make a lot more sense.  For now, *just* focus on the stem
   changes and what it does with consonant gradation.


``-i`` → ``-e`` (``ovi`` → ``ove-``).  Why?  Because ``-i-`` is for
plural, so basically everything gets changed to ``-e-`` for singular,
*except* some modern loanwords.

``-as`` → ``-aa`` (``vie·ras`` → ``vie·raa-``).  A similar thing can
happen with ``-is``.  This unconditionally opens the last syllable
(because of the long vowel) causes reverse consonant gradation
(``a·su·kas`` → ``a·suk·kaa-``) in *all* forms: it doesn't matter what
stem is attached, unlike the normal case where the stem affects the
gradation.

``-nen`` → ``-se-`` (``nai·nen`` → ``nai·se-``).  You can try to
rationalize this by imagining the ``n`` becomes ``s`` and the last
``n`` removed.  This is a very common pattern.

``-in`` → ``-ime-`` (``pu·he·lin`` → ``pu·he·li·me-``). In this case
``n`` becomes ``m`` which makes you somehow think of consonant
gradation, and ``e`` is added.

``-us`` → ``-uske-`` (``vas·taus`` → ``vas·tau·kse-``).  A ``k``
appears out of nowhere, which is actually reverse consonant gradation
so it sort of makes sense.  An ``e`` also is added.

``-e`` → ``-ee-`` (``ha·me`` → ``ha·mee-``), which also causes reverse
consonant gradation like the ``-as`` case because it unconditionally
opens the last syllable syllable (because of the long vowel). For
example ``kaa·de`` → ``kaa·tee-``.

There are lots of different words that end in ``-i``.  Most of them
become ``-e-`` in the stem, but new loanwords stay as ``-i-`` (new
loanwords generally don't obey old patterns).  There are also "old
Finnish words" that have a different category: partitive is different
(``pieni`` + partitive → ``pientä``).  So, when understanding ``-i``
words, classify them into three categories: very old Finnish words,
Finnish words, and modern loanwords.  You will learn this during your
studies of Finnish.

These are just some examples, and show you what to expect.  We don't
come close to explaining how to use all the different cases, use a
proper class for that!

There are *many* different types of stem changes, but most fit into
some major categories.  KOTUS (the Finnish language standards body)
classifies them into about 50 different types, but there is a lot of
effective duplication based on exact letters and forward/reverse
consonant gradation: however, in effect, many of these differences can
be understood based on the rules described above, so the effective
amount you have to learn is a lot smaller.  Wiktionary has a `list of
Kotus types <kotustypes>`_, but I don't think the list is that
accurate or useful: however, wiktionary is good if you know a word and
want to know it's inflection, or vice versa.  Also, be aware that
there is not universal agreement on the numbering of the types.

.. _kotustypes: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:Finnish_nominal_inflection



Forming new words with endings
==============================

After the above is known, it's fairly easy to form the endings.

Partitive adds ``-a`` to base words that ends in one vowel, ``-ta`` to
words that end in one consonant or a long vowel, and ``-tta`` to a
word that ends in ``-e``.  Why the special ``e``?  It used to be a
different type of sound, so is treated specially.  You notice that
``e`` is special very often.  Some words have a partitive form derived
from something else.

The illative adds ``-Vn`` to stems that end in a single vowel (``V``
represents a doubling of the previous vowel), ``-hVn`` to a stem that
ends in two vowels.  All of these cause the strong form to appear.

Most of the other stems are just added, and consonant gradation is
applied if needed.

When learning a new ending, the two important things to learn are: is
it applied to the base form or stem, and does it close the last
syllable (strong or weak)?



Plural
======

To form plural words, the basic rule is to add an ``-i-`` to the stem,
then whatever other ending.  It seems more complicated because of some
rules, but they are actually quite standard.

There can be vowel changes in partitive: For example ``viv`` → ``vjv``
(``v``\ =a vowel).  These vowel changes add another level of
complexity, but are mostly mechanical.

Double vowels become a dipthong: ``vv`` + ``-i-`` → ``vi``
(``vv``\ =same vowel twice).

Diphtongs mutate: ``ie`` + ``-i-`` → ``ei``.  ``uo`` + ``-i-`` →
``oi``.  ``yö`` + ``-i-`` → ``öi``.

Even though this plural may add a dipthong (``vi``), it always acts as
a single vowel so consonant gradation can still happen depending on
the endings (TODO: is this correct?).

There are lots of other complexities, but you can understand them
based on what is in this chapter plus a few more rules.



Overall diagram
===============

.. note::

   Insert diagram here:

   Base form. →  Partitive can form from base

   ⇅ (inflect)

   Inflectional stem.  (Quantum superposition strong/weak forms)  →
   nominative plural, all other forms.

   ⇅ (add ``-i-``)

   Plural inflectional stem (strong/weak).  → All other forms.



Notes
=====

**Don't be afraid!  It's probably impossible for this to make sense
right now, but think/come back to this as you start studying Finnish and
suddenly all the word changes will start making a lot of sense.**

Remember, it is best to not think of consonant gradation as a real
change of the word.  The word stem exists in both formats
simultaneously, and you happen to observe it in strong or weak form
depending on if it is closed or open.

The genitive is seen as the prototype "stem in weak form" (if you know
genitive, you know everything).  So, you will often be told "take the
genitive and remove ``-n`` to make other forms".  This just means "we
use the inflectional stem in weak form".  You see the same thing in
other cases: ``-vat`` removed from verbs to represent verb stem in
strong case, or ``-n`` removed from verbs to represent verb stem in
the weak case.  Think of the stems!

Really, for singular, if you know the nominative (base) and genitive
(``-n``), you know 90% of how to make all words.  If you know
nominative, genitive (``-n``), partitive (``-a``, ``-ta``, ``-tta``),
and illative (``-Vn``), you know how to use 99.99% or 100% of all
forms of all words words.  A similar thing can be said for plural.
So, the amount you actually have to know is much smaller than you
might expect.  Also, the rules of this chapter can handle 98% of all
the changes.

There are different complexities, but can still be understood in this
framework.  For example, ``-ton`` looks like it's doesn't close the
syllable, but actually it does.  This is because of historical
reasons: originally the suffix was ``-ttojn``, which would close the
word.  So, in this case, you don't remember ``-ton`` stems, you
remember "``-ton`` closes the stem".

There are other changes, such as ``uku`` to ``uvu`` and ``yky`` to
``yvy``.  These are much more rare, but you will learn about them
later.

There are also occasional vowel changes, because you can't have too
many vowels in a row.  For example, ``i`` becomes ``j``  between other
vowels.  So, you get more complex things like ``aika`` + ``-n`` →
``aikan`` → ``aian`` → ``ajan``.

In addition to the complexity of remembering all of these, it can also
just make general awareness of the language harder.  It can be easy to
remember ``maito`` + ``-n`` → ``maidon``, but if you are just quickly
reading and you see ``maidon``, it looks like a much different word
from ``maito``!  It takes a lot of internalizing to make all of the
connections.

It also takes some practice to resolve ambiguity: In a word, would
``t`` become ``d`` (consonant gradation), or ``tt`` (reverse consonant
gradation)?  It takes practice and experience to keep all the word
changes between all the different endings straight.  ``k`` is
especially annoying: it disappears in the weak form, so words can look
especially different.  When there is reverse consonant gradation, it
can seem to appear out of nowhere!
