Word order and basic noun cases
===============================

   Much to learn you still have.

   \- *Yoda*

Yoda can speak his sentences different orders, and we still
understand.  The same is true for Finnish.  Along with flexible word
order comes some noun cases (endings/conjugations) which help mark the
part of speech of words: the nominative, genitive(accusative), and
partitive.  Word order and the basic noun cases are the subject of
this chapter.

We aren't yet going to study how to actually convert words into these
noun cases, so in this chapter we will just discuss how word order
relates to these cases, and the basic structure of Finnish sentences.
We are doing this now because it is easy and fun, and helps to set the
stage for what comes next.  In future chapters, you will learn how to
actually apply the genitive and partitive to different words.


Word order
----------

Yoda can change word order and we still understand it.  "The pen is on
the table" is correct, but "on the table is the pen" sounds wrong, but
we can still understand it.  "The cat ate the apple" is correct, but
"the apple ate the cat" means something else and is clearly wrong.

These word order matters in the second, since ``the cat`` and  ``the
apple`` are identically grammatically (both our direct nouns).
However, ``the pen`` is a different grammatically from ``on the table``.
Because they are marked differently, the order can be changed without
too much confusion.

Since Finnish has flexible word order, there must be something to
convey the difference between ``the cat`` and ``the apple`` in the first
sentence.  In Finnish, the answer is that they are put into different
grammatical cases, the nominative and genitive(accusative).


Parts of speech
---------------

First, a diversion to grammar of English.  Hopefully you remember at
least the idea that sentences are made of "subject - verb - object"
basic components.  If you can break sentences down into these
components, you can easily figure out what cases to use most of the
time.  You should think about this at least a little bit, because
Finnish isn't a one-to-one mapping to English.

* In the sentence ``I ate the apple``, ``I`` is the *subject* - the
  thing that performs an action.  ``ate`` is the *verb* - the action.
  ``the apple`` is the *direct object*: it has an action done to it.
  The verb ``to eat`` intrinsically can be applied to a direct object.

* In the sentence ``I ate in the kitchen``, ``I`` is the *subject*,
  ``ate`` is the *verb*, and ``in the kitchen`` is an *indirect
  object*.  You are not acting on the kitchen, it is just some sort of
  modifier which describes how the action happens.

In the first of these, the verb ``to eat`` is used as a transitive
verb and in the second, it is used intransitively.  *Transitive* means
the verb takes direct object.  *Intransitive* means that the verb does
not take a direct object.  This distinction, and the difference
between *subject* and *object*, end up being critical to understand
the Finnish *nominative* and *genitive*.

More examples:

* ``I search for you``: intransitive
* ``I search you``: transitive, searching your body for something.
  Check `wiktionary <search>`_ to see these definitions: you see the
  definitions tagged by transitive or intransitive use.  You see the
  same things when you search the definition of Finnish verbs.

.. _search: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/search#Verb


The Finnish cases: Nominative, genitive, and partitive
------------------------------------------------------

The *nominative* is the basic form of words in Finnish, what you will
be able to look up in a dictionary, and you use when discussing
words.  **Nominative is used in the subject of the sentence**

The *genitive* is formed by adding ``-n`` to the end of the words.
(Not directly - there are various rules to adding ``-n``, which you
will learn about in the next chapter.  But not all words ending in
``-n`` are genitive.).  **Genitive is used for direct objects of
sentences**.

The *partitive* is formed by adding ``-a`` or ``-ta`` (usually) to the
end of the word (again, with various rules you will learn later).
**The partitive can be used for either the subject, direct object, or
indirect object**.

There are a lot of other noun cases, ``-sta``, ``-lle``, etc.  These
are all used for **indirect objects**, and if you see a word in one of
these cases, it is never a direct object.

So, there it is.  Finnish has a flexible word order, and the
nominative and genitive are directly allowing that.


Sentence structure
------------------

Finnish has flexible word order, but that doesn't mean it doesn't
matter.  Instead, the word order can mean either emphasis or be a part
of the meaning (really, consider that these are the same things).

In the simple case, the word order can imply an emphasis:

* ``Minä syön omenan``: "I(nominative,subject) eat
  apple(genitive,direct object)".  This is the typical order.
* ``Omenan minä syön``: "apple(genitive,direct object)
  I(nominative,subject) eat".  This emphasizes that the apple is being
  eaten, the fact that I am doing it is less important.

It can also have a more direct meaning.  For example, in *Suomen
Mestari 1*, you get an example like this:

* ``Kynä on pyödällä`` (The pen is on the table).  This implies that
  a pen (which is already known), and it is on the table.
* ``Pyödällä on kynä`` (On table is pen.  This is called an "existential
  clause", which means that you are introducing a previously unknown
  pen.

Note that these last examples are sentences have a subject and
indirect object, not subject and direct object - but the point still
holds.  Also, see how the emphasis can become a part of the meaning.

In the *Suomen mestari* series of books, you frequently see lessons
which introduce a certain type of sentence.  This is some combination
of word order and noun cases.  These are more profound than they first
appear: it's not just joining some words you know into a sentence, but
trying to teach you that a certain combination of word order and noun
cases conveys a specific meaning.  Unfortunately, they only write in
Finnish, you don't pick up this type of meaning when you are just
taking the course.


The Partitive
-------------

We haven't yet discussed the partitive.  Above, we said that it can be
used for either the subject or direct object, so how does that work?

The partitive can take different meanings.  The name itself has "part"
in it, so they all somehow relate to a part of a whole.  Below are the
most common uses.  The most important ones (take precedence) are first:

* Negation: Anything which is in the negative or you are saying does
  not exist is always in the partitive.  (Remember: if something
  doesn't exist, there is no whole.  You are saying that no *part* of
  any possibilities exist)

* Some verbs and phrases just intrinsically take partitive.  The verb
  ``rakastaa`` (to love: ``rakastan sinua``: "I love you(partitive)).
  Wishing is always in the partitive: ``hyvää päivää`` (wishing
  someone "good day").  (Clever people will realize this is the source
  of this site's name.)


* Numbers: ``kaksi omenaa`` ("two apples(partitive)").  Actually quite
  similar in use to English plural with numbers: ``yksi omena`` ("one
  apple(nomivative)"), ``kaksi omenaa`` ("two apples(partitive)" ),
  ``nolla omenaa`` ("zero apples(partitive)"), etc.

* Part of something, mass (uncountable) nouns.  You are not referring
  to all of something specific ("all the water in a cup"), but part of
  something ("water, some of that within the world").

* It can roughly be seen as the genitive/nominative represents the
  definite articles like ``the``, and the partitive can be used for
  indefinite articles like ``a``, ``some``, etc.

This is not a complete list - others mostly fit in the concepts above,
there are better sources for that information, and you will learn them
as time goes on.

In many cases, multiple options will be grammatically correct.  It is
best to stop and think, what what are the different options.  Are any
of them wrong for your meaning?  Then, if multiple of them could be
correct, which gets you closest to the actual meaning you want.  At
this stage, the difference between "the" and "a" becomes relevant.


More rules
----------

If a verb is *transitive*, then the verb *may* have a direct object
always.  If a verb is *intransitive*, the verb can't have a direct
object, so can't be used with the genitive.

* Transitive verbs: ``syödä`` (to eat: you eat something)
* Intransitive verbs: TODO.
* Both: eat(``syödä``)

The other noun cases ("locative cases", ``-Vn``, ``-ss``, ``-sta``,
``-lle``, ``-lla``, ``-lta``) are always *indirect objects* only,
*never* a direct object.

Furthermore, the different noun cases are important.  Some verbs are
*always* used with a particular noun case.  Perhaps more precisely:
some verbs have a meaning which *only* come with a certain noun case
(e.g. ``-sta``).  Some verbs have different meanings depending on what
noun cases are used.  For example, in English, "I reached the house"
means a different thing from TODO".  The verb `pitää`_ is a good
example of this.  On the wiktionary page, you see meanings that differ
depending if what comes after it is in elative (``-ssa``), partitive
(``-a,ta``), genitive (``-n``), infinitive, etc.  The verb `päästä`_
is another.  The different definitions are matched to different cases:
illative is ``-Vn``, elative is ``-sta``, one form is with the
infinitive of a verb, and so on.

.. _pitää: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pit%C3%A4%C3%A4#Verb
.. _päästä: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/p%C3%A4%C3%A4st%C3%A4#Verb

Not every sentence follows the "subject - verb - object" form.  For
example, ``sinä olet kaunis`` (you(nominative) are
beautiful(nomivative)), "you" and "beautiful" are compliments (refer
to the same thing).  The second word ``kaunis`` is nominative here
because ``you`` is indivisible.  This all goes down to more details
about sentence structure.  We aren't going deep into this topic in
this work, but just realize that the different noun cases matter and
relate to sentence structure and meaning.

"Forced clauses" ("I have to X") are a different pattern.  They are
written ``Minun täytyy opiskella`` ("I(genitive) have to
study(infinitive)").  Note that what is the subject in English (``I``)
is genitive here.  This is an example of an alternative sentence
structure, and you need to remember it either by "subject genitive" or
"some twisted structure where subject and object are reversed."

Don't worry!  You learn all of these very slowly, and you can make
sense of it *if you know what you are looking for* (which you know
now).  And this is no different from other languages which have the
same variations in meaning, except they are marked by different words,
prepositions, etc.  You have to accept that Finnish is synthetic, and
uses word endings instead of separate words.


Complexities
------------

But this isn't the whole story: actually, the case for direct objects
is called the *accusative*, but it is identical to the genitive for
the most part - except for the personal pronouns I=\ ``minä``, etc.
But for simplicity, most places just call it the genitive and then
have an exception for the personal pronouns.  (There is an analogy in
English: the personal pronouns "I", "he", "she", "we", ... have a
different form in a direct object: "me", "him", "her", "us").  In
fact, this is quite direct analogy for this use of a direct object
marker in English.

All of these cases can be in either singular or plural.  You learn
this later.

In the next chapter, you will learn how to actually make these noun
cases for real words.

